---
title: T&C's
---

# **Terms & Conditions**

---

## **CLIMB website**

By accessing the [**CLIMB website**](https://www.climb.ac.uk>) you agree to be bound by these terms and conditions. Your use of the website constitutes your agreement to the terms.

### **Privacy Policy**
The website respects your right to the privacy of any personal information you provide us with. See our [**Privacy policy page**](1.2.Privacy.md) for more information.

### **Use of Content**
+ The content of the pages of this website is for your general information and use only. It is subject to change without notice.
+ Neither we nor any third parties provide any warranty or guarantee as to the accuracy, timeliness, performance, completeness or suitability of the information and materials found or offered on this website for any particular purpose. You acknowledge that such information and materials may contain inaccuracies or errors and we expressly exclude liability for any such inaccuracies or errors to the fullest extent permitted by law.
+ Your use of any information or materials on this website is entirely at your own risk, for which we shall not be liable. 
+ This website contains material which is owned by or licensed to us. This material includes, but is not limited to, the design, layout, look, appearance and graphics. Reproduction is prohibited other than in accordance with the copyright notice, which forms part of these terms and conditions.
+ All trade marks reproduced in this website which are not the property of, or licensed to, the operator are acknowledged on the website.
+ Unauthorised use of this website may give rise to a claim for damages and/or be a criminal offence.
+ From time to time this website may also include links to other websites. These links are provided for your convenience to provide further information. They do not signify that we endorse the website(s). We have no responsibility for the content of the linked website(s).
+ Your use of this website and any dispute arising out of such use of the website is subject to the laws of England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales.

---

## **CLIMB platform**

Users of the CLIMB platform agree to be bound by the **Acceptable Use Policy** and the **Terms and Conditions** for the use of the CLIMB Infrastructure.

+ [**Acceptable Use Policy:**](../assets/20251101_AUP_CLIMB.pdf) This acceptable use policy governs the use of CLIMB, a specialised cloud computing platform designed for microbial bioinformatics research.

+ [**Terms and Conditions:**](../assets/20251101_T_and_Cs_CLIMB.pdf) These terms and conditions govern the contractual relationship between users and CLIMB cloud computing infrastructure.

!!! warning
    If you do not agree to these terms and conditions, you may not use CLIMB.