---
title: Privacy policy
---

# **Privacy & cookie policy**

---

This website uses cookies - small text files that are placed on your machine to help the site provide a better user experience. In general, cookies are used to retain user preferences, store information for things like shopping carts, and provide anonymised tracking data to third party applications like Google Analytics. As a rule, cookies will make your browsing experience better. However, you may prefer to disable cookies on this site and on others. The most effective way to do this is to disable cookies in your browser. We suggest consulting the Help section of your browser or taking a look at [**the About Cookies website**](https://www.aboutcookies.org/) which offers guidance for all modern browsers.

CLIMB.ac.uk does not actively track you as an individual.

Should you send us an email via our contact form, your name, email address and message will be emailed to us (as you would expect). This information is kept private. We will store this information within our own email system so that we are able to respond to you.

Should you comment on a blog post or web page on this site, then your name, email address, IP address and message will be stored in our website database (as you would expect). This makes your name, website address and comment (but not your email address) viewable by the general public on the website.

We do not use Third Party / Tracking / Advertising cookies. We do not share your personal information or email address with third parties.

NONE OF THE INFORMATION WE GATHER VIA COOKIES IDENTIFIES YOU AS AN INDIVIDUAL - IT IS ALL ENTIRELY ANONYMOUS.

## **Changes to the privacy policy**
From time to time we may update this privacy policy in line with website changes that may affect the personal information we gather about you. It is assumed that you accept such changes if you continue to use the site and services. If you do not accept such changes then you should stop using CLIMB.ac.uk’s website and services, and contact us (details above) if you would like any information removed.
